## Abstract {.page_break_before}

**Motivation**: Preprints allow researchers to make their results quickly and widely accessible to the scientific community. 
These are scholarly works that have yet to undergo the peer review process and are often hosted within open access repositories such as bioRxiv. 
The majority of studies involving bioRxiv have focused on tracking preprint popularity, analyzing the crowds that read preprints and measuring the preprint-publication lifecycle; however, a fundamental piece that is missing is an understanding of the language contained within preprints and how that language changes through the publishing process. 
**Objective**: We sought to examine the linguistic features of bioRxiv preprints and compare them to their published counterparts.
**Methods**: We compared the bioRxiv preprint corpus against Pubmed Central’s Open Access corpus (PMC) and New York Times Annotate Corpus (NYTAC) using standard linguistic methods.
Next, we trained a word2vec model to generate word embeddings for every word within the bioRxiv corpus. 
We used these embeddings to generate document representations for every article within bioRxiv and PMC. 
We used PCA on these representations to measure the leading source of variation among preprints.
**Results**: We found that topic-specific terms such as “genome”, “neuron” and “network” were enriched within bioRxiv compared to PMC, reflecting bioRxiv’s uptake in bioinformatics and neuroscience. 
Restricting to only preprint-published pairs, the largest differences appeared to be related to typesetting. 
Within bioRxiv, the leading source of linguistic variation among preprints captured the distinction between quantitative and cellular biology. 
We found that document similarity in our embedding space was meaningful, enabling us to identify ~1700 published preprints that had not been linked to the journal version and suggesting that the fraction of published preprints is substantially higher than previously reported. 
We also found that preprints published in specific journals were not uniformly distributed in the embedding space, so we were able to use linguistic features to predict the venue in which a preprint would be published. 
We have built an app that allows anyone to input a bioRxiv preprint and receive a set of the most linguistically similar journals and articles, which are potential publication venues for their work.
