## Introduction

Preprints are scholarly works that are shared before they have been formally peer reviewed and published.
The practice of sharing preprints has a long history [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2003995].
The longest ongoing use started with physicists in the 1990s [@doi:10.15252/embj.201695531].
Preprints were used in the life sciences community during the 1960s before publisher pressure stopped the practice [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2003995].
Over the past decade preprints have made a resurgence within the life sciences community [@doi:10.1101/833400; @doi:10.7554/eLife.45133.001].
Preprints are now becoming widely accepted and used within the life sciences and other communities [@doi:10.1038/530265a; @doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2016.06.035; @doi:10.1126/science.aaf9133; @doi:10.1038/s41557-020-0477-5; @doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1002549; @doi:10.1038/530265a; @doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000151; @doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000259].
Common preprint repositories include arXiv [@doi:10.1108/14666180010345564], bioRxiv [@doi:10.1101/833400] and medRxiv [@url:https://www.medrxiv.org/]; however, there are over 60 different repositories available [@url:https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2019/10/16/the-second-wave-of-preprint-servers-how-can-publishers-keep-afloat/].

The scientific community has begun to analyze the impact of preprints in the life sciences.
Preprints are being posted at an increasing rate [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000269].
Preprints are also rapidly shared on social media, routinely downloaded, and cited [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047523].
Articles with matching preprint versions are cited and discussed more often than articles without them [@doi:10.1162/qss_a_00043; @doi:10.7554/eLife.52646].
Certain categories of preprints seem to be read and shared differently by both scientists and non-scientists [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.06.981589].
Across preprint servers, analyses suggest that between two-thirds to three-quarters of preprints are eventually published [@doi:10.7554/eLife.45133.001; @doi:10.1002/pra2.175].
The time required for a preprint to be published can vary from preprint to preprint; however, preprints with a single version often take less time to publish than preprints with multiple versions [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3455146], suggesting that authors may update their preprints between submissions for peer review.

Studies of life sciences preprints have primarily focused on the metadata associated with these articles; however, their textual content remains unexamined.

We sought to understand the language landscape of preprints by performing a linguistic analysis of the bioRxiv corpus.
We examined textual differences between preprints and published literature by comparing the entire corpus of preprints with articles available in the open access PubMed Central repository.
We also examined linguistic differences between preprints and their corresponding published pairs.
Examining this shift will provide a unique opportunity to ascertain parts of the peer review and publishing process and how it impacts the scholarly literature.
Neural-network derived document embeddings provide a useful space for determining the textual similarity of preprints, which enables us to extend this work beyond word frequencies.
Examining articles with particularly close proximity in this space reveals unannotated preprint-publication pairs that earlier analyses could not consider.
In this space a preprint's nearest neighbors are also more likely than distant articles to share an eventual publishing venue with the preprint itself.
We provide a webserver that will displays neighboring journals and articles for any preprint on bioRxiv or medRxiv, which can help authors identify similar papers or suitable journals.
Our linguistic analysis, the first of the bioRxiv corpus, reveals the impact of the life sciences publishing process, introduces a method to identify matching preprint-published article pairs, demonstrates that the text content of preprints is related to their eventual publication venue, and provides a more complete picture of the fraction of preprints that are eventually published.
