## Discussion and Conclusions

BioRxiv is a constantly growing repository that contains life science preprints.
Contrary to previous work [@doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.3520v1], over 77% of bioRxiv preprints that were published ended up within Pubmed Central's Open Access Corpus (PMCOA).
This highlights a beneficial shift towards most preprint authors publishing their work in an open access format.
Despite this benficial shift, majority of research involving bioRxiv focuses on the metadata of preprints.
The language contained within these preprints has yet to be systematically examined.
Throughout this work, we sought to analyze the language within these preprints and understand how it changes in response to peer review.

Our global corpora analysis found that writing within bioRxiv is consistent with the biomedical literature in the PMCOA repository, suggesting that bioRxiv is linguistically similar to PMCOA.
Token-level analyses between bioRxiv and PMCOA suggested that research fields drive significant differences; e.g., more patient-related research is prevalent in PMCOA than bioRxiv.
This observation is expected as preprints focused on medicine are supported by the complementary medRxiv repository [@url:https://www.medrxiv.org/].
Token-level analyses for preprints and their corresponding published version suggest that peer review may focus on data availability and incorporating extra sections for published papers; however, future studies are needed to ascertain individual token level changes as preprints venture through the publication process.
Furthermore, it would be interesting to compare preprints against accepted author manuscripts within Pubmed Central. 

Document embeddings are a versatile way to examine language contained within preprints, understanding peer review's effect on preprints, and provide extra functionality for preprint repositories.
We used a linear approach to generate document embeddings as our main goal was model interpretability rather than performance; however, future work could incorproate more advanced models such as Doc2Vec[@arxiv:arXiv:1405.4053] or BERT [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz682] to generate document vectors.
Examining linguistic variance within document embeddings of life science preprints revealed that the largest source of variability was informatics.
This observation bisects the majority of life science research categories that have integrated preprints within their publication workflow.
Along with anaylyzing lingusitic variation, future work could utilize this embedding space to quantify language sentiment changes between preprints and published articles over time.
Additionally, future applications similar to [@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1335-8] could be applied to this embedding space as well.

Preprints are typically linked with their published articles via bioRxiv manually establishing links or authors self-reporting that their preprint has been published; however, gaps can occur as preprints change their appearance through multiple versions or authors do not notify bioRxiv. 
Our work suggests that document embeddings can help fill in missing links within bioRxiv using full text or even abstracts themselves, which highlights the practical use of detecting articles published in a non-open access format. 
Furthermore, our analysis reveals that the publication rate for preprints is higher than previously estimated, even though our analysis can only account for published open access papers.
Our results raise the lower bound of the total preprint publication fraction; however, the true fraction is necessarily higher.
Future work, especially that which aims to assess the fraction of preprints that are eventually published, should account for the possibility of missed annotations.

Preprints take a variable amount of time to become published, and we examined factors that influence a preprint's time to publication.
Our half-life analysis on preprint categories revealed that preprints in most bioRxiv categories take similar amounts of time to be published.
An apparent exception is the scientific communication and education category, which contained preprints that took much longer to publish.
Regarding individual preprints, each new version adds several weeks to a preprints time to publication, which is roughly aligned with authors making changes after a round of peer review; furthermore, preprints that undergo substantial changes take longer to publish.
Overall, these results illustrate that bioRxiv is a practical resource for obtaining insight into the peer-review process.

Lastly, we found that document embeddings were associated with the eventual journal at which the work was published.
We trained two machine learning models to identify which journals publish linguistically similar papers towards a query preprint.
Our models achieved a considerably higher fold change over the baseline model, so we constructed a web application that makes our models available to the public and returns a list of the papers and journals that are linguistically similar to a bioRxiv or medRxiv preprint.
